# Subsonic F-16

In the late 1970's NASA released detailed aerodynamic models for an F-16 based on subscale and subsonic wind-tunnel testing, along with a simplified model of the turbofan engine ([Nguyen, et al., 1979](https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19800005879)).
This remains an excellent benchmark for validation and development of flight control frameworks, since it is still one of the more comprehensive publicly available characterizations of a high-performance military aircraft (and the F-16 is still a workhorse today!).
It is also one of the main running examples in the classic introductory GNC textbook ["Aircraft Control and Simulation"](https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119174882) by Stevens, Lewis, and Johnson, making it a great educational example as well.

In this series we'll go through two different approaches to implementing the F-16 model.
We'll assume you are familiar with the basic principles and terminology of flight dynamics modeling; if not, the textbook above is a great place to start.

First, we'll show essentially a direct port of the original Fortran code from Stevens, Lewis, and Johnson to Python.
For existing codes in Fortran, MATLAB, Python, Julia, etc. this is a quick and easy way to get your model working, though it does not take advantage of the built-in [hierarchical modeling](../hierarchical/hierarchical00.md) or [spatial mechanics](../../blog/2025/spatial.md) capabilities.

Second, we'll rewrite the same model using a hierarchical component-based approach and the [`RigidBody`](#archimedes.spatial.RigidBody) 6dof dynamics model.
This takes a little more organizational effort up front - you have to decide what your subsystems are and define clear interfaces for each of them - but the payoff is improved clarity and maintainability in the long term.


## Outline

1. [**Porting Legacy Code [OPTIONAL]**](f16_01.md)
    - Translating the Fortran code to Archimedes
    - Pros and cons of the "monolithic" approach

2. [**Building the Model**](f16_02.md)
    - Breaking down the subsystems
    - Implementing with [`@struct`](#archimedes.struct) modules

3. [**Trim Analysis**](f16_03.md)
    - Defining dynamic trim conditions
    - Trimming for altitude hold, steady climb, and coordinated turns

4. [**Linearization and Stability**](f16_04.md)
    - Model decomposition
    - Linearization with autodiff
    - Linear stability analysis
    - Nonlinear simulation

## Prerequisites

Besides familiarity with flight dynamics, this series assumes you are familiar with the basics of Archimedes (for instance the content on the [Getting Started](../../getting-started.md) page) and the concept of [structured data types](../../trees.md).

The code itself uses the [`interpolant`](#archimedes.interpolant) functionality heavily for aerodynamic and propulsion lookup tables, but is otherwise plain NumPy.

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
f16_01
   
```

